---
name: Pandora's Box 
url: projects/pandoras-box
thumbnail: img/pandoras-box.jpg
layout: project
head: PandorasBox
---
Pandora's Box
Emily White: alto &amp; tenor sackbut, trombone, baroque violin, voice
Miguel Tantos Sevilliano: alto &amp; tenor sackbut, trombone, voice
John Kenny sackbut, alto, tenor &amp; bass trombone, recorders, voice

Pandora&rsquo;s Box is a trio of hidden delights, combining music of the late medieval and renaissance periods with contemporary composition, improvisation, poetry and physical theatre. Weaving a subtle tapestry of words and music, poetry of love and intrigue from the courts, pilgrim routes and cloisters of Old Europe, to gritty modern sound worlds. Lift the lid and watch what flies out!
Music from the Chatilly Codex, Hildegard Von Bingen, Ortiz, Monteverdi, Benjamin Britten, John Kenny, Brian Lynn, Susumo Yoshida and many anonymous fellow travellers &ndash; exploring the world of folk music encountered along the way, as folk music is a life proof of the past living in the present. Inspired by the legion of anonymous poets, and by Petrarch, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Brian Nisbet, Molly Bashaw and more.
Biographies:

Emily White studied trombone and sackbut at The Royal Academy of Music, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and violin at Trinity College of Music, London. She won the Ludwig Lebell Award in 2006 and the Ella Kidney Early Music Prize 2007. Emily is a member of English Cornette and Sackbut Ensemble who recently collaborated with I Fagiolini to record Striggio Mass in 40 Parts on Decca release, and Pandora&rsquo;s Box with John Kenny and Miguel Tantos.
                   
Emily is also a member of Chaconne Brass specialising in new music written for them, and they recently released their&nbsp; disc with Deux-Elles, &lsquo;Dancing in the Dark&rsquo; featuring&nbsp; BBC commission &lsquo;Lullaby&rsquo; by Hultmark.&nbsp; Emily formed The Isla Quartet, (formed during her time as Musician in Residence with Deveron Arts, Huntly) is a member of Devon Baroque, In Echo and&nbsp; PanStrad.&nbsp; Emily has appeared on television playing with The Sixteen in their BBC series Sacred Music, and is looking forward to recording Handel&rsquo;s &lsquo;Saul&rsquo; with them later this year.&nbsp; She freelances with ensembles such as The Academy of Ancient Music, English National Ballet, His Majesties Sagbuts and Cornettes, The Academy of St Martin in the Fields, The Academy of Ancient Music and Ex Cathedra.&nbsp; Emily has worked at Shakespeare&rsquo;s Globe Theatre since 1997. With them she has toured Seoul, Tokyo, Barbados and Chicago and was musical director of Much Ado About Nothing, 2008. She has played with The Tiger Lilies, Paul Weller and appeared playing the trombone on Eastenders. In 2009 Emily set up, and now co-directs the Huntly Summer School, which brings traditional and classical music tuition to children and adults in Aberdeenshire.

Emily has coached modern and historical trombone at The Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, Trinity College of Music, Birmingham Conservatoire, The Royal College of Music and Dartington International Summer School.

Miguel Tantos&rsquo;s performances have been described by Art Vehicle as an &ldquo;incredibly bravura display of avant-garde trombone playing&rdquo;. A former Principal Trombone of the Navarre Symphony Orchestra and The Santiago Philharmonic Orchestra, his solo appearances include, amongst others, the Biennale Festival in Venice, the Weingarten Festival in Germany, the National Concert Hall in Madrid and the Institute of Contemporary Art in London. A chamber music devotee, he is a former member of the classical improvisation ensemble Prima Volta and the trio Pandora&rsquo;s Box.</p>

As an early music specialist, he has worked with some of the world&#39;s most prestigious ensembles including His Majesty&#39;s Saggbuts and Cornetts, English Baroque Soloists,The Sixteen, B-Rock, English Cornett and Sackbut Ensemble, the Academy of Ancient Music and Tafelmusik.

Miguel has stamped his own personal mark on trombone performance. Following his award of a Fellowship at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, he has undertaken a series of high-profile projects and performances, including several performances along the continent of Sofia Gubaidulina&acute;s Transformation, a major collaboration with visual artist Terry Smith, various performances of the Johan de Meij&rsquo;s Trombone Concerto, a solo performance for Sky Television in the UK and a major collaboration with the Motion Group in an enterprising new version of Stravinsky&acute;s The Soldier&acute;s Tale at The Old Vic theatre in London, produced by Kevin Spacey.

He is also a member of the theatre troupe Wonderful Beast and an education specialist who regularly works with the education departments of Royal Philharmonic and English Touring Opera. His particular talent for integrating music, acting and dance has led to extensive involvement in educational projects, workshops and music-theatre performances all along the world, including places like prisons, hospitals, schools, special needs centers. Miguel has offered Masterclases to students of a number of prestigious Institutions such as the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester (UK), The Manuel de Falla Foundation in Granada (Spain), The Hochschule f&uuml;r musik in W&uuml;zburg (Germany) and the University of Chile among others.

John Kenny has performed and broadcast in over 50 nations. He is internationally acclaimed for his interpretation of contemporary music, but also works with jazz and early music, frequently presenting his own compositions.&nbsp; He is particularly active in collaborations with dance and theatre: in 1983 he began his long collaboration with TNT Theatre and playwright Paul Stebbings, performing, composing and directing the music for productions which continue to tour worldwide, including Cabaret Faust, Tempest Now, The Wizard of Jazz, Moby Dick, Moon Palace, The Taming of The Shrew, and Romeo &amp; Juliet. His past commissions have included the London Contemporary Dance Theatre, Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival, the International Trombone Association, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Edinburgh Contemporary Arts Trust, Chamber Group of Scotland, Dance Umbrella, St. Magnus Festival, BBC Proms in The Park, American Drama Group Europe, The New Haven International Festival of Arts and Ideas (USA) and the Festival d&rsquo; Angers, France, Vokal Nord (Norway), CCMIX Institut (France).
                    <p>	John Kenny is a professor at both the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London and The Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama. Since the early 1990&rsquo;s he has also become increasingly involved with musical archaeology, and in 1993 he became the first person for 2000 years to play the great Celtic war horn known as the carnyx, and now lectures and performs on the instrument internationally, in the concert hall, and on radio, television, and film. In March 2003 he performed his composition &ldquo;The Voice of The Carnyx&rdquo; to an audience of 65,000 in the Stade De France, Paris. In 2009 he undertook a month long lecture recital tour of the USA which included the world premier of his composition &ldquo;Wild Stone&rdquo; for alto flute and carnyx, and released his seventh solo album, &ldquo;Embracing the Unknown&rdquo;&nbsp; for trombone with harp &amp; string quartet. Highlights of 2010/11 have been touring Europe in the leading role of &ldquo;The Mystery of Poe&rdquo; with the American Drama Group of Europe, and helping to bring to fruition the reconstruction of the magnificent Tintignac Carnyx, recently discovered in the Dordoigne region of France. &nbsp;</p>
